docs(fetch_winhttp): add design document for WinHTTP custom transport (#595)
microsoft/oxidizer: crates/fetch_winhttp/docs/design.md

  Windows certificate stores and system trust policy. Applications that must
  honor enterprise trust configuration or CTLs get that without bundling a userland
  TLS stack. (Client certificates are a Schannel capability but are not exposed in
  v1; see §4.1.)
- **OS-managed protocol stack.** HTTP/1.1, HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 negotiation,
  connection pooling, keep-alive, proxy discovery and automatic gzip/deflate
  decompression are handled by the OS.
- **Smaller dependency surface.** No rustls/aws-lc-rs/native-tls/hyper on the
  request path.

Out of scope: any non-Windows platform (the crate is `#[cfg(windows)]` in its
entirety); WebSocket upgrades; proxy auto-config scripting beyond what WinHTTP
does natively.

### 1.1 Constructing a client

A caller builds a WinHTTP-backed client the same way as the bundled Tokio transport,
except the constructors arrive through an extension trait this crate implements on
`fetch::HttpClient` (imported into scope):

```rust,ignore
use fetch::HttpClient;
use fetch_winhttp::HttpClientWinHttpExt; // brings the constructors into scope

// Defaults:
let client = HttpClient::new_winhttp();

// Configured:

> let client = HttpClient::builder_winhttp(WinHttpDeps {

Reviewer: For use of `..Default::default()` we cannot apply `#[non_exhaustive]`. Are we sure we won't be adding new fields later?

Author: [Copilot speaking] Agreed - we should expect to add fields. Reworked design.md §1.1 so `WinHttpDeps`, `WinHttpOptions` and `WinHttpTlsConfig` are all `#[non_exhaustive]` and built through builders (`WinHttpDeps::builder().tls(...).options(...).sink(...).build()`) instead of a struct literal with `..Default::default()`, so new knobs can land compatibly. Fixed in 2883b8d8.

  callers always see a decoded body. `fetch` itself has no content decoding, so there is
  no double-decode risk. No opt-out is exposed in v1, since it would only hand callers an
  encoded body nothing downstream can decode.
- **Brotli/zstd.** Not decoded (the OS does not support them); such responses arrive
  still-encoded with `Content-Encoding` intact and pass through verbatim.
- **Request-body compression.** Not performed automatically; a caller that pre-encodes its
  body and sets `Content-Encoding` has it sent as-is.
- **Redirects are not followed.** Like `fetch_hyper` (and unlike WinHTTP's own default),
  3xx responses are surfaced to the caller unchanged rather than followed, with no knob
  to re-enable automatic redirects.
- **Cookies and automatic authentication are disabled.** The transport keeps no cookie
  store and does not answer `WWW-Authenticate`/407 challenges; `Set-Cookie`/`Cookie` and
  challenge responses pass through as plain data for the caller to manage. The transport
  is thus stateless between requests.

(The specific OS options behind each behavior are implementation.md §10.3.)

> ## 6. Timeouts and time

Reviewer: from the perspective of transport, it needs to ensure drop safety, i.e. when fetch cancels the future, transport needs to honor it.

Also, fetch attaches timeout information to each request that can be inspected and may be even applied to transport?

See:
https://docs.rs/http_extensions/latest/http_extensions/timeout/index.html

Reviewer: saw this mentioned bellow, drop safety still applies

Author: [Copilot speaking] Both points addressed in 2883b8d8.

Drop safety: honored. Dropping the request future closes the WinHTTP handle, which cancels the in-flight operation and delivers the terminal HANDLE_CLOSING that reclaims the request context (design.md §7 cancellation model; implementation.md §4). I added an explicit note in design.md §6.1 that cancellation is the transport's backstop for any timeout it does not enforce natively.

Per-request timeout inspection: adopted where the semantics actually match, which turned out to be a split:
- BodyTimeout (idle gap between body chunks, reset on progress) matches WINHTTP_OPTION_RECEIVE_TIMEOUT (per-receive-operation idle timer, reset each read), so the transport now reads it from the request extensions and programs that native timer per-request.
- ResponseTimeout is a *total* over connect + send + receive-headers. WINHTTP_OPTION_RECEIVE_RESPONSE_TIMEOUT covers only the post-send wait for the first response byte (it excludes connect and send), so it is not a faithful remap. ResponseTimeout therefore stays enforced above the transport (as fetch/http_extensions already do) and the native receive-response timer is set only as a looser liveness backstop.

Mapping detail is in implementation.md §10.4.

`fetch` enforces most timeouts above the transport; WinHTTP provides native
timers for the transport-owned steps. The transport owns exactly one timeout that
`fetch` does not enforce for us: connect.

### 6.1 Which timeouts the transport honors

- **Connect timeout** (`TransportOptions.connect_timeout`, default 30 s): honored by this
  transport as a *total* deadline on connection establishment (§6.2). `fetch` models this
  option but leaves each transport to enforce it.
- **Response timeout and body idle timeout** (`http_extensions::ResponseTimeout` /
  `BodyTimeout`): enforced by `fetch` above the transport and honored here the same way
  `fetch_hyper` does; both surface as `HttpError::timeout`.
- **Seatbelt request timeout**: enforced above the transport; the transport is not
  involved.

> - **Resolve and send timeouts**: `fetch` has no concept for these, so they are exposed as

Reviewer: `SendTimeout` is really just the `ResposeTimout` in disguise. We send request and wait for the response without touching the response body. After that the `BodyTimeout` applies.

Author: [Copilot speaking] Agreed - fixed in 51169ff2. Removed the standalone "send timeout" framing: §6.1 now states send is not a distinct concept (send + await-headers is exactly the span `ResponseTimeout` governs, then `BodyTimeout` takes over), leaving only a `Resolve` transport-specific knob. Updated the implementation.md §10.4 timeout table to match (WinHTTP send field left as a loose backstop, not driven by a dedicated fetch knob).

  decompression are handled by the OS.
- **Smaller dependency surface.** No rustls/aws-lc-rs/native-tls/hyper on the
  request path.

Out of scope: any non-Windows platform (the crate is `#[cfg(windows)]` in its
entirety); WebSocket upgrades; proxy auto-config scripting beyond what WinHTTP
does natively.

### 1.1 Constructing a client

A caller builds a WinHTTP-backed client the same way as the bundled Tokio transport,
except the constructors arrive through an extension trait this crate implements on
`fetch::HttpClient` (imported into scope):

```rust,ignore
use fetch::HttpClient;
use fetch_winhttp::{HttpClientWinHttpExt, WinHttpDeps, WinHttpOptions, WinHttpTlsConfig};

// Defaults:
let client = HttpClient::new_winhttp();

// Configured. Every WinHTTP config type is built through a builder, never a struct
// literal, so all of them are `#[non_exhaustive]` and can gain knobs in later versions
// without a breaking change:
let deps = WinHttpDeps::builder()
    .tls(WinHttpTlsConfig::builder()
        .accept_invalid_certs(true)                 // Schannel knobs, §4
        .build())
    .options(WinHttpOptions::builder()

>         .connect_timeout(Duration::from_secs(10))   // protocol/timeout tuning, §3, §5, §6

Reviewer 2: 🤖: `connect_timeout` is configured here via `WinHttpOptions`, but §6.1/§6.2 and implementation.md §10.4 say the transport reads `TransportOptions.connect_timeout` (implementation.md's timeout test table also alternates between the two). Please pick one source of truth or specify precedence — otherwise this public example and the implementation contract can yield different connect-timeout values.

Author: [Copilot speaking] Fixed in b2bcb930. `TransportOptions.connect_timeout` is now the single source of the connect deadline; the overloaded `WinHttpOptions.connect_timeout` is removed from the 1.1 example (illustrated with `resolve_timeout` instead), design.md 6.1 states WinHttpOptions exposes no separate connect knob, and implementation.md 7.2/10.4 are aligned.

fields can be added compatibly:

```rust,ignore
/// WinHTTP-specific dependencies. Construct with [`WinHttpDeps::builder`].
#[derive(thread_aware::ThreadAware)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub struct WinHttpDeps { /* tls, options, sink - private; set via the builder */ }

impl WinHttpDeps {
    /// Starts building a `WinHttpDeps`. `tls`/`options`/`sink` default when unset.
    pub fn builder() -> WinHttpDepsBuilder;
}

/// Adds WinHTTP-transport constructors to `fetch::HttpClient`.
pub trait HttpClientWinHttpExt {
    /// Returns a builder for an `HttpClient` on the WinHTTP transport.
    fn builder_winhttp(deps: impl Into<WinHttpDeps>) -> HttpClientBuilder;
    /// Builds an `HttpClient` on the WinHTTP transport with default deps.
    fn new_winhttp() -> HttpClient;
}
```

`WinHttpTlsConfig` (§4) and `WinHttpOptions` (§3, §5, §6) follow the same
builder + `#[non_exhaustive]` pattern.

### 1.2 TLS is configured on the transport, not through `fetch`'s `TlsOptions`

`fetch`'s generic `TlsOptions`/`TlsBackend` carries rustls/native-tls material
(crypto providers, verifiers, client-cert resolvers) that is meaningless to
Schannel. WinHTTP does TLS itself and accepts only a small set of knobs, so

> `fetch_winhttp` therefore ignores `fetch`'s TLS configuration entirely and takes its

Reviewer 2: 🤖: Silently ignoring `fetch`'s `TlsOptions` is the one dropped option with security consequences. `CustomContext.tls` is always populated, so a caller who set non-default TLS material — a private CA root, a client identity (mTLS), or cert-pinning — silently gets a default system-trust connection with no signal, even though the same code 'works' on fetch_hyper. Please make the design explicit that a non-default `TlsOptions` triggers the §11 build-time warning, and consider a hard error (not just a warn) when security-affecting TLS material is present, since this is a silent security weakening rather than a benign fidelity gap.

Author: [Copilot speaking] Deferred to the fetch TLS-configuration redesign rather than per-transport special-casing. b2bcb930 records the silent-ignore hazard in stabilization.md item 2: because `CustomContext::tls` is always populated, security-affecting `TlsOptions` a transport cannot consume are dropped with no signal. The fix is to configure TLS on the transport that can honor it so unhonorable combinations are unrepresentable; playing whack-a-mole with per-field warnings/rejections is explicitly rejected as papering over a mis-shaped API.

  v1; see §4.1.)
- **OS-managed protocol stack.** HTTP/1.1, HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 negotiation,
  connection pooling, keep-alive, proxy discovery and automatic gzip/deflate
  decompression are handled by the OS.
- **Smaller dependency surface.** No rustls/aws-lc-rs/native-tls/hyper on the
  request path.

Out of scope: any non-Windows platform (the crate is `#[cfg(windows)]` in its
entirety); WebSocket upgrades; proxy auto-config scripting beyond what WinHTTP
does natively.

### 1.1 Constructing a client

A caller builds a WinHTTP-backed client the same way as the bundled Tokio transport,
except the constructors arrive through an extension trait this crate implements on
`fetch::HttpClient` (imported into scope):

```rust,ignore
use fetch::HttpClient;
use fetch_winhttp::{HttpClientWinHttpExt, WinHttpDeps, WinHttpOptions, WinHttpTlsConfig};

// Defaults:
let client = HttpClient::new_winhttp();

// Configured. Every WinHTTP config type is built through a builder, never a struct
// literal, so all of them are `#[non_exhaustive]` and can gain knobs in later versions
// without a breaking change:
let deps = WinHttpDeps::builder()

>     .tls(WinHttpTlsConfig::builder()

Reviewer 3: [design] This ships `HttpClientWinHttpExt::builder_winhttp`/`new_winhttp` even though stabilization.md item 1 calls this exact extension-trait shape "a workaround, not a fix" for the asymmetry with `HttpClient::builder_tokio`/`new_tokio`. Since design.md is what downstream consumers read for construction, could it include a forward-reference/stability note here (e.g. "this constructor shape may change before 1.0 — see stabilization.md item 1") so early adopters aren't surprised if it changes?

Author: Deferring - will follow-up in next PR together with implementation.

        .build())
    .options(WinHttpOptions::builder()
        .resolve_timeout(Duration::from_secs(10))   // transport-specific tuning, §3, §5, §6
        .build())
    .sink(observed::Sink::noop())                   // telemetry sink; detailed in v1.1
    .build();

let client = HttpClient::builder_winhttp(deps)
    .build();                    // a `fetch::HttpClientBuilder`, so the pipeline can be tuned first
```

The result is an ordinary `fetch` `HttpClient`; no other caller code changes.
`WinHttpDeps` carries only WinHTTP-specific configuration - the clock, memory pool, and
telemetry meter are supplied by `fetch` itself and are not configured here. It and its
component config types are `#[non_exhaustive]` and constructed through builders so new
fields can be added compatibly:

```rust,ignore
/// WinHTTP-specific dependencies. Construct with [`WinHttpDeps::builder`].
#[derive(thread_aware::ThreadAware)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub struct WinHttpDeps { /* tls, options, sink - private; set via the builder */ }

impl WinHttpDeps {
    /// Starts building a `WinHttpDeps`. `tls`/`options`/`sink` default when unset.
    pub fn builder() -> WinHttpDepsBuilder;
}

> /// Adds WinHTTP-transport constructors to `fetch::HttpClient`.

Reviewer 3: [design] `fetch_winhttp` silently ignores a caller's `fetch::TlsOptions` (private CA root, client identity, cert pinning) with no warning — even though this design already implements a "warn on unhonorable option" mechanism (implementation.md §11) for less security-sensitive things like `connection_lifetime`. Since stabilization.md item 2 itself calls this a "silent-ignore hazard," could the existing §11 warn policy be extended now to cover a non-default `TlsOptions` (detect `CustomContext::tls` is populated and emit the same build-time warning), rather than waiting on the broader fetch-level TLS redesign? This seems like a self-contained, low-risk addition that closes a gap the PR's own docs flag.

Author: Deferring - will follow-up in next PR together with implementation.

### 4.1 Client certificates (mTLS) are out of scope for v1

`fetch` does not require a transport to support client certificates: its mTLS surface
(`fetch::tls::ClientIdentity`) travels inside the generic `TlsOptions` that `fetch_winhttp`
deliberately ignores (§1.2), and a transport that offers no client identity is a
conforming `fetch` transport. Client certificates are an uncommon feature the large
majority of callers never use, and supporting them is a self-contained chunk of future
work with its own lifetime and ownership concerns.

v1 therefore does not implement client certificates; `WinHttpTlsConfig` exposes no
client-identity field. A later iteration can add a WinHTTP-specific client-identity type
if a concrete need appears.

## 5. WinHTTP-managed HTTP behavior

The OS handles several HTTP behaviors internally. The transport configures each so it
behaves consistently with the rest of `fetch`:

- **Automatic decompression (always on).** The transport advertises
  `Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate`; gzip/deflate responses are transparently decoded
  before the body is streamed up, with `Content-Encoding`/`Content-Length` stripped, so

>   callers always see a decoded body. `fetch` itself has no content decoding, so there is

Reviewer 3: [language] "streamed up" reads awkwardly here; "streamed out"/"streamed back" would match the verb used elsewhere in the doc (e.g. §6.2's "the body is streamed afterward").

```suggestion
gzip/deflate responses are transparently decoded before the body is streamed out, with `Content-Encoding`/`Content-Length` stripped, so callers always see a decoded body.
```

Author: Deferring - will follow-up in next PR together with implementation.

  *does* match WinHTTP's `WINHTTP_OPTION_RECEIVE_TIMEOUT` (a per-receive-operation idle
  timer, reset each read), so the transport honors it natively by programming that timer
  per-request from the request's `BodyTimeout`. It surfaces as `HttpError::timeout`.
- **Seatbelt request timeout**: enforced above the transport; the transport is not
  involved.
- **Send timeout**: not a distinct concept. Sending the request and waiting for the
  response headers (without touching the body) is exactly the span `ResponseTimeout`
  already governs, after which `BodyTimeout` takes over; there is no separate send
  deadline to honor.
- **Resolve timeout**: `fetch` has no concept for a standalone DNS-resolution deadline
  (it is otherwise subsumed by `connect_timeout`), so it is exposed as a transport-specific
  `WinHttpOptions` knob for callers that need to bound resolution finely, as discussed in
  the fetch API stabilization feedback (../../fetch/docs/stabilization.md).

Cancellation is the transport's backstop for every timeout it does not enforce natively:
when `fetch` (or any layer above) drops the request future on a timeout, the transport

> honors it by closing the WinHTTP handle and tearing the request down (the drop-safety

Reviewer 3: [doc-consistency] This cites "the drop-safety contract in §7 and implementation.md §4", but design.md's own §7 is "Error handling model" (Win32 error mapping / retry classification) — it doesn't define a drop-safety contract. Only the `implementation.md §4` half of this reference is correct. Suggest dropping the stray `§7` reference:

```suggestion
honors it by closing the WinHTTP handle and tearing the request down (the drop-safety contract is in implementation.md §4).
```

Author: Deferring - will follow-up in next PR together with implementation.
